 
I:\MEPC\81\MEPC 81-INF.9.docx  
 
 
 
E 
  
MARINE ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION 
COMMITTEE 
81st session  
Agenda item 4 
 
MEPC 81/INF.9 
5 January 2024 
ENGLISH ONLY 
Pre-session public release: ☒ 
 
 
HARMFUL AQUATIC ORGANISMS IN BALLAST WATER 
 
Information on challenges associated with the use of portable ballast water 
management systems as a contingency measure 
 
Submitted by IMarEST 
 
 
SUMMARY 
Executive summary: 
This submission presents information on challenges encountered 
when deploying portable ballast water management systems as 
contingency measures. The purpose is to facilitate discussion on 
how these challenges can be considered and addressed during  
the BWM Convention review process. 
Strategic 
direction,  
if applicable: 
1 
Output: 
1.24 
Action to be taken: 
Paragraph 12 
Related documents: 
MEPC 71/INF.30; 
MEPC 80/4/6; resolutions 
MEPC.127(53), 
MEPC.153(55), 
MEPC.300(72), MEPC.306(73); BWM.2/Circ.62 
and BWM.2/Circ.70/Rev.1 
 
Background 
 
1 
Regulation B-1 of the Ballast Water Management Convention (Convention) requires 
ships to have an approved Ballast Water Management Plan (BWMP). Guidelines (G4) were 
amended by resolution MEPC.306(73) for the inclusion of contingency measures in the 
BWMP, and BWM.2/Circ.62 provides guidance on contingency measures under the 
Convention. 
 
2 
As presented in document MEPC 71/INF.30, industry has developed a variety of 
innovative solutions and technologies to assist ships in cases when a contingency measure is 
needed. These scenarios may include an installed BWMS becoming temporarily inoperable, a 
ship encountering challenging water quality (CWQ), ballasting operations in emergency 
situations, or use on ships that cannot practically install a BWMS permanently.  
 
MEPC 81/INF.9 
Page 2 
 
I:\MEPC\81\MEPC 81-INF.9.docx  
3 
Challenges with implementation of ballast water treatment technologies developed 
specifically for use as a contingency measure have been encountered due to the lack of clarity 
in the existing regulations and relevant guidance. 
 
4 
This document provides information on implementation challenges encountered 
during the experience-building phase (EBP) and aims to facilitate open discussion on possible 
ways to address these issues during development of the package of proposed amendments 
to the Convention.  
 
Discussion 
 
5 
Over time, treatment technologies designed for use as contingency measures have 
continued in their development. These systems may be port-based, barge-based or may be 
fully portable for temporary placement on board a ship to allow treatment of ballast water as a 
contingency measure. Some technologies have undergone full type approval testing in 
accordance with the BWMS Code to demonstrate effectiveness, even though they are 
intended for temporary use rather than permanent installation on board. 
 
6 
The demand for contingency measures to be readily available to shipowners is  
likely to increase as implementation of the Convention progresses and port State control 
inspections increase in frequency. Regulation B-3.6 provides options for ships to use a 
reception facility, which can provide a contingency measure option, and Guidelines (G5)  
provide relevant guidance for provision of reception facilities. Conversely, there is currently  
no specific regulatory mechanism that supports the use of port-based, barge-based, and/or 
portable BWMS. However, there is a need for these options to be available to shipowners.   
 
7 
Challenges with implementation of portable BWMS as a contingency measure have 
been encountered due to the lack of clarity in the existing regulations and lack of relevant 
guidance. For instance, although a technology has been tested in accordance with the  
BWMS Code, is included in the approved BWMP as a suitable contingency measure for a ship, 
and is for temporary ballast water treatment use, portable BWMS have been considered as 
permanently installed by some flag States and/or recognized organizations.  
 
8 
The interpretation that a temporarily installed BWMS for use as a contingency 
measure is considered permanently installed has triggered some flag States and/or their 
recognized organizations to require commissioning testing to be conducted in line with the 
requirements of BWM.2/Circ.70/Rev.1 at each deployment of the contingency measure. This is 
not practical nor economically feasible for ships and can cause unnecessary schedule and 
operational delays.   
 
9 
Experience indicates that the lack of regulatory clarity has created difficulty in gaining 
acceptance for the use of these technologies as contingency measures, and additional 
commissioning testing requirements appear to be further hindering implementation of  
these innovative technologies. Challenges have also been expressed in document 
MEPC 80/4/6, paragraph 32, noting that options are "very rare".  
 
10 
In part, this rarity is because the demand for these contingency measure options is 
currently low, influenced by the regulatory gap that exists and which creates uncertainty for 
shipowners about the acceptability of their use. Clarifying the Convention and its relevant 
instruments can facilitate consistent implementation across Administrations and can increase 
the contingency measure options available to support shipowners when they encounter 
situations such as operating in ports with CWQ. 
 
MEPC 81/INF.9 
Page 3 
 
 
I:\MEPC\81\MEPC 81-INF.9.docx  
11 
To improve implementation and the contingency measure options available to 
shipowners, the BWM Convention review stage may consider the following: 
 
.1 
expansion of regulation B-3 beyond reception facilities to include other 
contingency measure technologies that have been developed and are 
available; 
 
.2 
revise BWM.2/Circ.62 to clarify that commissioning testing requirements  
do not apply to contingency measures;  
 
.3 
revisions to the BWMS Code to allow BWMS designed as a contingency 
measure (barge-based, portable BWMS, etc.) to obtain a type approval; and  
 
.4 
revise Guidelines (G4) to indicate that, if the contingency measure is included 
in the approved BWMP, then additional testing or approval requirements are 
not necessary. 
 
Action requested of the Committee 
 
12 
The Committee is invited to note this information when further developing guidance 
for contingency measures and amendments to the Convention. 
 
 
___________ 
